Document KEP-5963: DRADeviceCompatibilityGroups for K8s 1.37 (#56288)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/concepts/resource-management/dynamic-resource-allocation/dra-features.md

can be co-allocated on the same physical hardware. Without this feature,
incompatible device combinations are only detected when the kubelet prepares
the Pod on a node — resulting in a failed preparation. With compatibility
groups, the scheduler rejects incompatible combinations at scheduling time,
before any node-side work begins.

This is most useful for hardware that supports mutually exclusive operating
modes. For example, a GPU that can run in either MIG mode or vGPU mode: a
device in MIG mode and a device in vGPU mode cannot be co-allocated because
they consume overlapping physical resources in incompatible ways. By declaring
`compatibilityGroups`, the driver makes this constraint visible to the
scheduler.

This feature builds on [partitionable devices](#partitionable-devices): the
`compatibilityGroups` field lives on `device.consumesCounters[]` entries, which
only exist for partitionable devices. Both the `DRADeviceCompatibilityGroups`
and `DRAPartitionableDevices` feature gates must be enabled in the
kube-apiserver and kube-scheduler.

### How it works {#device-compatibility-groups-how-it-works}

> A driver adds a `compatibilityGroups` list to each

Reviewer: "Adds" almost makes this sound like the driver is updating the ResourceSlice after it's already been created. Wording this a bit differently might help clarify that it's a property generally known when the ResourceSlice is first created:

```suggestion
A driver defines a `compatibilityGroups` list for each
```

> `device.consumesCounters[]` entry in a `ResourceSlice`. The list contains

Reviewer: style nit (there are several places where we should update API kinds not to be formatted as inline code):

```suggestion
`device.consumesCounters[]` entry in a ResourceSlice. The list contains
```

https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#code-style-inline-code

> one or two opaque string names that represent the operating mode or partition

Reviewer: "One or two" implies "not zero" which actually is valid as explained in a later paragraph. Could we align this with the "at most 2" language used in the "Constraints" section below?

Each device declares its operating mode as a compatibility group:

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceSlice
metadata:
  name: gpu-counters
spec:
  nodeName: worker-1
  pool:
    name: gpu-pool
    generation: 1
    resourceSliceCount: 2
  driver: gpu.example.com
  sharedCounters:
  - name: gpu-0-memory
    counters:
      memory:
        value: 8Gi
---
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceSlice
metadata:
  name: gpu-devices
spec:
  nodeName: worker-1
  pool:
    name: gpu-pool
    generation: 1
    resourceSliceCount: 2
  driver: gpu.example.com
  devices:
  - name: gpu-0-mig
    consumesCounters:
    - counterSet: gpu-0-memory
      counters:
        memory:
          value: 6Gi
      compatibilityGroups:
      - mig
  - name: gpu-0-vgpu
    consumesCounters:
    - counterSet: gpu-0-memory
      counters:
        memory:
          value: 6Gi
      compatibilityGroups:
      - vgpu
```

In this example:
- `gpu-0-mig` belongs to the `mig` group.
- `gpu-0-vgpu` belongs to the `vgpu` group.

If a Pod or PodGroup requests two devices from this pool, the scheduler checks
whether the two chosen devices share a common compatibility group on the

> `gpu-0-memory` counter set. Since `{"mig"} ∩ {"vgpu"} = ∅`, the pair is

Reviewer: In this example, are the two different partitions already not co-allocateable given that the counter set defines 8Gi memory and each partition consumes 6Gi of that? The example would be a bit more compelling if the partitions consumed <=4Gi of memory where the compatibility groups are the only limiting factor.

Author: I agree, I'll change that

rejected. Both requests can only be satisfied by two MIG devices (or two vGPU
devices) from a pool where such pairs exist.

### Constraints {#device-compatibility-groups-constraints}

- Each `consumesCounters[]` entry may declare at most **2** group names.
- Group names must be unique within a single entry.
- Group names are opaque to Kubernetes; they are meaningful only within the
  publishing driver's pool.
- Groups are compared per counter set: groups on one counter set have no effect
  on co-allocation decisions for a different counter set.

### Version-skew safety {#device-compatibility-groups-version-skew}

When the `DRADeviceCompatibilityGroups` feature gate is disabled (the default
for alpha), the kube-apiserver strips the `compatibilityGroups` field from any
new or updated `ResourceSlice` — unless the old object already had the field
set. The scheduler then treats devices in any pool that previously had grouped

> devices as belonging to an incomplete pool and skips them entirely.

Reviewer: Since the "How it works" section mentions "an unset, nil, or empty list", I think it's worth mentioning which of those constitute the field being "set". e.g. If a ResourceSlice is created with `compatibilityGroups: nil` and the `DRADeviceCompatibilityGroups` feature enabled, then the feature is disabled, can that device still be allocated, or does the scheduler consider the pool incomplete?

Author: Hi @nojnhuh !

In the case you describe, the device can be allocated (only with other devices that leave the field unset OR declare ANY of `nil`, `[]`) and the pool is considered complete.

The only case where a pool is considered incomplete is when both of the following are true:
- `DRADeviceCompatibilityGroups` is disabled
- At least one device in the pool specifies `compatibilityGroups` (`len(compatibilityGroups) > 0`)

So the field is being "set" only when `len(compatibilityGroups) > 0`

Author: I'll make sure to add this somewhere in the doc

{{< feature-state feature_gate_name="DRADeviceCompatibilityGroups" >}}

Device compatibility groups let a DRA driver declare which partitioned devices
can be co-allocated on the same physical hardware. Without this feature,
incompatible device combinations are only detected when the kubelet prepares
the Pod on a node — resulting in a failed preparation. With compatibility
groups, the scheduler rejects incompatible combinations at scheduling time,
before any node-side work begins.

This is most useful for hardware that supports mutually exclusive operating
modes. For example, a GPU that can run in either MIG mode or vGPU mode: a
device in MIG mode and a device in vGPU mode cannot be co-allocated because
they consume overlapping physical resources in incompatible ways. By declaring
`compatibilityGroups`, the driver makes this constraint visible to the
scheduler.

This feature builds on [partitionable devices](#partitionable-devices): the
`compatibilityGroups` field lives on `device.consumesCounters[]` entries, which
only exist for partitionable devices. Both the `DRADeviceCompatibilityGroups`
and `DRAPartitionableDevices` feature gates must be enabled in the

> kube-apiserver and kube-scheduler.

Reviewer: One more nit I missed the first time around: https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#use-code-style-for-kubernetes-command-tool-and-component-names

```suggestion
`kube-apiserver` and `kube-scheduler`.
```

      - vgpu
```

In this example:
- `gpu-0-mig` belongs to the `mig` group.
- `gpu-0-vgpu` belongs to the `vgpu` group.

If a Pod or PodGroup requests two devices from this pool, the scheduler checks
whether the two chosen devices share a common compatibility group on the
`gpu-0-memory` counter set. Since `{"mig"} ∩ {"vgpu"} = ∅`, the pair is
rejected — even though the counter set has enough memory for both. Both
requests can only be satisfied by two MIG devices (or two vGPU devices) from a
pool where such pairs exist.

### Constraints {#device-compatibility-groups-constraints}

- Each `consumesCounters[]` entry may declare at most **2** group names.
- Group names must be unique within a single entry.
- Group names are opaque to Kubernetes; they are meaningful only within the
  publishing driver's pool.
- Groups are compared per counter set: groups on one counter set have no effect
  on co-allocation decisions for a different counter set.

### Version-skew safety {#device-compatibility-groups-version-skew}

When the `DRADeviceCompatibilityGroups` feature gate is disabled (the default
for alpha), the kube-apiserver strips the `compatibilityGroups` field from any

> new or updated `ResourceSlice` — unless the old object already had the field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
new or updated ResourceSlice — unless the old object already had the field
```
